[Cites 13, Cited by 16]
Supreme Court of India
Mrs. Kanika Goel vs The State Of Delhi Thru Sho on 20 July, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 71
Author: A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench: D.Y. Chandrachud, A.M. Khanwilkar, Dipak Misra
                                                            1

                                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 635­640 OF 2018

                         Mrs. Kanika Goel                                           …..Appellant(s)
                                                           
                                                          :Versus:

                         State of Delhi through S.H.O. 
                         and Anr.                                                  ....Respondent(s)




                                                      J U D G M E N T


                         A.M. Khanwilkar, J.


1. These appeals take exception to the judgment and orders passed   by   the   High   Court   of   Delhi   at   New   Delhi   dated   16 th November, 2017,  1st December, 2017 and 6th December, 2017, in Writ Petition (Criminal) No.374 of 2017 and Criminal M.A. No.2007 of 2017, whereby the writ petition filed by respondent No.2 for issuing a writ of habeas corpus for production of his minor daughter M (assumed name), who was about 3 years of age at the time of filing of the writ petition and for a direction for return of M to the jurisdiction of the competent Court in the   United   States   of   America   in   compliance   with   the   order dated 13th January, 2017 passed by the Circuit Court of Cook County,   Illinois,   USA,   came   to   be   allowed.   The   Delhi   High Court directed the appellant  to comply with the directions as M was in her custody, the appellant being M’s mother. 

2. The respondent No.2 asserted that he was born in India but presently is a citizen of USA since 2005. He is working as the CEO of a Company called ‘Get Set Learning’. The appellant is   his   wife   and   mother   of   the   minor   child   M.   She   is   a   US Permanent Resident and a “Green Card” holder and has also applied   for   US   citizenship   on   2nd  December,   2016.   At   the relevant time, she was a certified teacher in the State of Illinois and was employed as a Special Education Classroom Assistant in   Chicago   Public   Schools.   The   respondent   No.2   and   the appellant   got   married   on   31st  December,   2010   as   per   Sikh rites, i.e. Anand Karaj ceremony, and Hindu Vedic rites in New Delhi.  It was clearly understood between both the parties that the   appellant,   after   marriage,   would   reside   with   respondent No.2 in the USA. Eventually, the appellant travelled to the USA on a Fiance Visa and got married to respondent No.2 again on 19th  March, 2011 at Cook County Court in Chicago, Illinois. Before   the   marriage,   the   parties   entered   into   a   Pre­Nuptial Agreement dated 20th October, 2010 enforceable in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, USA. The appellant then took employment as a teacher in Chicago Public School and also   secured   a   US   Permanent   Citizen   Green   Card.   The appellant   became   pregnant   and   gave   birth   to   M   on   15 th February, 2014 in USA. M is thus a natural born US citizen and was domiciled in the State of Illinois, USA from her birth till   she   was   clandestinely   removed   by   the   appellant   in December 2016 under the guise of undertaking a short trip to New Delhi to meet the appellant’s parents.  

3. The appellant was scheduled to return to Chicago on 7 th January, 2017 but she went missing and filed a petition under Section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for short “the 1955   Act”)   being   H.M.A.   Case   No.27   of   2017   seeking dissolution of marriage on the ground of cruelty, along with an application under Section 26 of the 1955 Act on 7 th  January, 2017 seeking a restraint order against respondent No.2 from taking M away from the jurisdiction of Indian Courts. A notice was issued thereon to respondent No.2, made returnable on 11th January, 2017. 

4. The   respondent   No.2,   however,   filed   an   emergency petition   for   temporary   sole   allocation   of   parental responsibilities   and   parenting   time   in   his   favour   or   in   the alternative, an emergency order of protection for possession of his   minor   daughter   M,   before   the   Circuit   Court   of   Cook County, Illinois on 9th  January, 2017. A notice of emergency motion was served on the appellant by e­mail, informing her of the proposed hearing on 13th January, 2017. 

5. In the meantime, on 11th January, 2017 the Family Court at   New   Delhi   issued   a   fresh   notice   to   respondent   No.2   and passed   an   ex­parte   order   on   the   application   filed   by   the appellant   under   Section  151 of   the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure, restraining   respondent   No.2   from   removing   the   minor   child from the jurisdiction of that Court until further orders. 

6. The respondent No.2 on the other hand, caused to file a missing   person   complaint   on   13 th  January,   2017   before   the SHO,   Vasant   Kunj   (South),   P.S.   New   Delhi,   which   was acknowledged   by   the   Police   Station   on   14 th  January,   2017. Besides   the   said   complaint,   respondent   No.2   moved   the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, USA on 13 th  January, 2017   when   an   ex­parte   order   was   passed   for   interim   sole custody of the minor child.  The said order reads thus:

“1) The child M born on 15.02.2014, in Chicago, Illinois and   having   resided   in   Chicago   solely   for   her   entire   life (specifically   at   360   East   Randolph   Street,   Chicago,   IL 60601) is also a US citizen.
2) The child is a habitual resident of the state of Illinois, United   States   of   America   having   never   resided   anywhere else. Illinois is the home state of the child pursuant to the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Enforcement Act. 
3) Karan   Goel   is   the   natural   father   of   the   minor   child and granted interim sole custody of the minor child. Child is to be immediately returned to the residence located in Cook County, Illinois, USA by Respondent. 
4) The Cook County, Illinois Court having personal and subject matter jurisdiction over the parties and matter.
5) All  further   issues   regarding   visitation,   child   support are reserved until further Order of Court.”

7. The appellant did not comply with the order of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, therefore, respondent No.2 filed a   writ   petition   before  the  Delhi  High  Court  on  1 st  February, 2017, to issue a writ of habeas corpus and direct the appellant to   produce   the   minor   child   M   and   cause   her   return   to   the jurisdiction of the Court in the United States, in compliance with the order dated 13th January, 2017 passed by the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, to enable the minor child to go back   to   United   States   and   if   the   appellant   failed   to   do   so within   a   fixed   time   period,   to   direct   the   appellant   to immediately   hand   over   the   custody   of   the   minor   child   to respondent   No.2   (writ   petitioner)   to   enable   him   to   take   the minor child to the jurisdiction of the US Court. 

8. This   writ   petition   was   contested   by   the   appellant.   The High   Court   issued   interim   orders   including   regarding   giving access of the minor child to respondent No.2 in the presence of the   appellant   and   her   parents.   Finally,   all   the   contentious issues between the parties were answered by the High Court by a speaking judgment and order dated 16 th November, 2017, in favour of respondent No.2, after recording a finding that the paramount interest of the minor child was to return to USA, so that she could be in her natural environment. To facilitate the parties   to   have   a  working  arrangement  and  to  minimize  the inconvenience,   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court  issued directions in the following terms: 

“139.  In   the   light   of   the   aforesaid,   we   are   more   than convinced that respondent No.2 should, in the best interest of the minor child M, return to USA along with the child, so that she can be in her natural environment; receive the love, care   and   attention   of   her   father   as   well   –   apart   from   her grandparents, resume her school and be with her teachers and   peers.   Pertinently,   respondent   No.2   is   able­bodied, educated,   accustomed   to   living   in   Chicago,   USA,   was gainfully employed and had an income before she came to India in December 2016 and, thus, she should not have any difficulty in finding her feet in USA. She knows the systems prevalent   in   that   country,   and   adjustment   for   her   in   that environment   would   certainly   not   be   an   issue.   Accordingly, we direct respondent no.2 to return to USA with the minor child   M.   However,   this   direction   is   conditional   on   the conditions laid down hereinafter.
140. Respondent No.2 has raised certain issues which need to be addressed, so that when she returns to USA, she and the minor child do not find themselves to be in a hostile or disadvantageous environment. There can be no doubt that the return of respondent No.2 with the minor child should be at the expense of the petitioner; their initial stay in Chicago, USA, should also be entirely funded and taken care of by the petitioner by providing a separate furnished accommodation (with   all   basic   amenities   &   facilities   such   as   water, electricity, internet connection, etc.) for the two of them in the vicinity of the matrimonial home of the parties, wherein they have lived till December 2016. Thus, it should be the obligation   of   the   petitioner   to   provide   reasonable accommodation sufficient to cater to the needs of respondent No.2 and the minor child.   Since respondent No.2 came to India   in   December   2016   and   would,   therefore,   not   have retained   her   job,   the   petitioner   should   also   meet   all   the expenses of respondent No.2 and the minor child, including the   expenses   towards   their   food,   clothing   and   shelter,   at least for the initial period of six months, or till such time as respondent No.2 finds a suitable job for herself. Even after respondent   No.2   were   to   find   a   job,   it   should   be   the responsibility of the petitioner  to meet the expenses of the minor   daughter   M,   including   the   expenses   towards   her schooling,   other   extra­curricular   activities,   transportation, Attendant/   Nanny   and   the   like,   which   even   earlier   were being   borne   by   the   petitioner.   The   petitioner   should   also arrange a vehicle, so that respondent No.2 is able to move around to attend to her chores and responsibilities. 
141. Considering   that   the   petitioner   had   initiated proceedings in USA and the respondent No.2 has been asked to appear before the Court to defend those proceedings, the petitioner   should   also   meet   the   legal   expenses   that respondent No.2 may incur, till the time she is not able to find a suitable job for herself. However, if respondent no.2 is entitled to legal aid/assurance from the State, to the extent the legal aid is provided to her, the legal expenses may not be borne by the petitioner.
142.  The   petitioner   should   also   undertake   that   after   the return of the minor child M with respondent No.2 to USA, the custody of M shall remain with respondent No.2 and that he shall not take the minor child out of the said custody by use of force. He should also undertake that after respondent No.2 lands in Chicago, USA, the visitation and custody rights qua   the   parties,   as   may   be   determined   by   the   competent Court in USA, shall be honoured. 
143.  Respondent   No.2   has   also   expressed   apprehension that   the   petitioner   would   seek   to  enforce   the   terms   of   the Pre­Nuptial   Agreement   entered   into   between   the   parties.

Since the said agreement has been entered into in India, its validity has to be tested as per the Indian law. Respondent No.2   has   already   initiated   suit   for   declaration   and permanent   injunction   to   challenge   the   said   Pre­Nuptial Agreement   dated   22.10.2010.   We   have   perused   the   said agreement and we are of the view the petitioner should not be permitted to enforce the terms of this agreement in USA, at least till the said suit preferred by the respondent No.2 is decided.   The   petitioner   should,   therefore,   give   an undertaking  to this Court, not  to rely upon or  enforce the said Pre­Nuptial Agreement to the detriment of respondent No.2   in   any   proceedings   either   in   USA,   or   in   India.   The undertaking shall remain in force till the decision in the suit for   declaration   and   injunction   filed   by   respondent   No.2 challenging   validity   of   the   Pre­Nuptial   Agreement.   This undertaking   shall,   however,   not   come   in   the   way   of   the petitioner   while   defending   the   said   suit   of   the   respondent No.2. 

144.  With the aforesaid arrangements and directions, in our view,   respondent   No.2   can   possibly   have   no   objection   to return to USA with M. The comfort that we have sought to provide to respondent No.2, as aforesaid, is to enable her to have a soft landing when she reaches the shores of USA, so that the initial period of at least six months is taken care of for her, during which period she could find her feet and live on her own, or under an arrangement as may be determined by the competent Courts in USA during this period. At this stage, we are not inclined to direct that the custody of M be given to the petitioner so that he takes her back to USA. M is a   small   child   less   than   4   years   of   age,   and   that   too,   is   a female child. Though she may be attached to the petitioner – her  father, she is bound to need her  mother  – respondent no.2   more.   In   our   view,   once   M   returns   to   USA   with   her mother,   i.e.   respondent   No.2,   orders   for   custody   or   co­ parenting   should   be   obtained   by   the   parties   from   the competent   Courts   in   USA.   Moreover,   it   would   be   for   the Courts in USA to eventually rule on the aspect concerning the   financial   obligations   and   responsibilities   of   the   parties towards   each   other   and   towards   the   minor   child   M   –   for upbringing   the   minor   child   –   M   independent   of   any directions issued by this Court in this regard.

145.  The   petitioner   is   directed   to   file   his   affidavit   of undertaking in terms of paras 140 to 144 above within ten days with advance copy of the respondents. The matter be listed   on   01.12.2017   for   our   perusal   of   the   affidavit   of undertaking, and for passing of final orders.”

9. By   this   judgment   and   order   passed   by   the   High   Court and   the   directions   issued,   as   reproduced   hitherto,   the substantive issues inter se the parties were answered against the   appellant  to  the  extent  indicated. In continuation  of  the aforementioned directions, a further order was passed on 1 st December, 2017 by the High Court which reads thus: 

“1.  In terms of the directions contained in our judgment dated   16.11.2017,   the   petitioner   Karan   Goel   has   filed   the affidavit dated 20.11.2017. A perusal of the affidavit shows that the petitioner has undertaken and consented to abide by all the conditions imposed upon him, so that respondent no.2 could return to USA with the minor child.
2.  Respondent   no.2   has  also  filed  a   counter­affidavit   to the   said   affidavit   of   the   petitioner.   Respondent   no.2   has raised the issue that the petitioner has not particularized the amounts and facilities that the petitioner would provide in case respondent no.2 were to return to USA with the minor child. 
3.  The   petitioner   is   present   in   Court   with   his   parents.

The petitioner has tendered in Court the details/particulars of the proposed financial aid in terms of our judgment. The said details/ particulars read as follows:

‘1.  Upon   Respondent   No.2   giving   a   date/this Hon’ble Court fixing a date on which she and minor child   M   will   depart   from   Delhi   for   Chicago,   Illinois, USA,   the   Petitioner   shall   do   the   following   at   least   3 [three] days prior to their departure date:­
(i) Book   airline   tickets   on   United   Airlines   with   a non­stop  flight  from   Delhi  to USA   for   minor  child M and Respondent No.2;
(ii) Provide   a   hotel   room   at   The   Hyatt   Regency (located   ~7   minute   walk   from   minor   child   M’s preschool) for the first seven (7) days after landing in Chicago to enable Respondent No.2 to sign leases for
(a) accommodation and (b) a car; and
2.   The   Petitioner   is/   was   already   paying   [directly out of his salary] the following amounts for minor child M   and   shall   continue   to   do   so   in   compliance   of   the directions   of   this   Hon’ble   Court   (all   amounts   in   US Dollars = USD):­
(i) ~$2,100/month   Preschool   tuition   at   Bright Horizons Lakeshore East where she was enrolled five days a week; and
(ii) ~$232/month   for   health   insurance   via   Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
3.   In addition to point 2 above, the Petitioner shall pay the following amounts (all amounts in US Dollars =USD) for a total of $4,200/month to Respondent No.2 in advance for the first month [by transferring the said amount into a joint account prior to Respondent No.2 and   minor   child   M   taking   off   from   Delhi]   and thereafter   by   the   28th   of   every   month   for   the subsequent   month   [for   the   initial   period   of   six months]:­ 
(i)   $2,600/month   as   rent   for   a   fully   furnished apartment   with   high­speed   internet,   air   conditioning and heating, water, garbage disposal, and parking for a vehicle; 

(ii)  $400/month   for   Respondent   No.   2’s   health insurance; 

(iii) $1,000/month in expenses for food, shelter, and clothing for minor child M and Respondent No. 2; and

(iv)   $200/month for a car lease and car insurance. 

4.   In case legal aid / assurance is not available / provided to Respondent No.2, the Petitioner shall give an additional amount of $1,500/ month to Respondent No.2   for   her   legal   expenses   for   the   first   six   months after   her   and   minor   child   M’s   return   to   Chicago, Illinois, USA’. 

4.   We   have   also   separately   recorded   the   statement   of petitioner on oath, wherein he has undertaken to this Court to abide by the offer made by him in terms of our decision. He  has  also  undertaken  that   in case of any  breach  of  the said   stipulation,   respondent   no.2   may   enforce   the   same before the competent Court in USA.

5.   To ensure compliance of the aforesaid obligation, the petitioner has offered that he shall deposit an amount US$ 25,000 in an escrow account, which shall be operated upon orders of the competent Court in Cook County, Illinois, USA. The   said   account   shall   be   operatable   at   the   instance   of respondent   no.2   in   case   of   non   compliance   of   any   of   the condition and to the extent it becomes necessary, under the orders of the said Court.

6.  The petitioner seeks a short adjournment to produce the relevant documents in that regard before this Court. 

7.  Since the petitioner and his parents are in India, and it   is   submitted   that   the   petitioner   has   not   met   his   minor daughter since March 2017, it is agreed that the petitioner and his parents shall be allowed to meet the minor child M today, tomorrow and day after tomorrow at DLF Promenade Mall, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi. 

8.  Today’s meeting shall take place between 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m., and on Saturday and Sunday, the meeting shall take place from 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. The petitioner has desired that the meeting may take place exclusively. 

9.  Since   respondent   no.2   has   apprehensions,   the petitioner   has   offered   to   and   has   deposited   his   American Passport with the Court Master. The Court Master shall seal the same in Court and thereafter the same be handed over to the Deputy Registrar concerned to be kept in safe custody. The same shall not be parted with unless so ordered by this Court. 

10.  The  petitioner   has  assured   that   the  child  shall  not   be taken   away   unauthorisedly   and   shall   be   duly   returned   to respondent no.2 at the end of the meeting on each date. 

11.  List on 06.12.2017 for further directions. On the next date,   the   child   may   be   brought   to   the   Court   so   that   the petitioner and his parents are able to meet the child in the Children’s Room at the Mediation Centre between 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.

12. Order dasti under the signatures of the Court Master.”

10.  Again, on 6th December, 2017, another order was passed to formally dispose of the writ petition finally in the following terms:

1. “Mr.   Jauhar   has   tendered   in   Court   the   affidavit   of undertaking   sworn   by   the   petitioner   along   with   three annexures, which are:
(i) A   statement   from   Citibank,   USA   in   respect   of   joint account held by the petitioner and respondent No.2;
(ii) An affidavit of Molshree A., Sharma, ESQ., a partner at the law firm of Mandel, Lipton, Roseborough & Sharma Ltd., based in Chicago; and
(iii) Documents   to   show   deposit   of   US$25,000   in   an escrow account operated by the aforesaid law firm.

2. The petitioner has stated that he has already deposited US$25,000 into his attorney’s escrow account. The affidavit of Molshree A., Sharma affirms that the said escrow account may   be   operated   by   respondent   No.2/   Kanika   Goel   in   the event of failure of the petitioner/ Karan Goel in meeting his obligations as per his undertaking given to this Court.

3. We are satisfied with the aforesaid arrangement made by the petitioner to secure the interests of respondent No.2 and   the   minor   child   in   terms   of   our   decision   dated 16.11.2017.

4. In   these   circumstances,   we   now   direct   respondent No.2 to return to USA along with the minor child M within two weeks from today, failing which the minor child M shall be handed over to the petitioner, to be taken to USA.

5. We may observe that learned counsel for respondent No.2 has sought more time on the ground that respondent No.2 wishes to assail the decision dated 16.11.2017 and that the   Supreme   Court   shall   be   closed   for   Winter   Vacation   in later   part   of   December,   2017   and   early   part   of   January, 2018. However, we are not inclined to grant any further time for  the  reason  that  it  is  imperative  for   respondent  No.2  to return to USA on or before 23.12.2017, and if she does not so   return,   her   return   may   not   be   permitted   by   the Immigration Department of USA without further compliance being   made   by   her.   We   cannot   permit   a   situation   to   arise where respondent No.2 is able to defeat the direction issued by this Court on account of her own acts & omissions.

6. The passport of the petitioner deposited in this Court is   directed   to   be   returned   forthwith.   The   said   passport   be returned   to   Mr.   Prabhjit   Jauhar,   larned   counsel   for   the petitioner. The said passport shall be retained by Mr. Jauhar so as to enable the petitioner and his parents to meet the child M, while they are in New Delhi, India. Mr. Jauhar shall return the passport to the petitioner only at the time when the petitioner has to return to USA, after ensuring that the custody of the child is with respondent No.2.

7. The   meeting   between   the  petitioner   and   his   parents, on the one hand, and the child, on the other hand, shall be undertaken   as   per   the   arrangement   worked   out   by   us earlier, i.e. two hours every working day, and three hours at the weekends, as mutually agreed between the parties. 

8. The   petition   stands   disposed   of   in   the   aforesaid terms.”

11. Being   aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   judgment   and   orders, the   appellant,   being   the   mother   of   the   minor   child   M,   has approached this Court by way of Special Leave under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. This Court issued notice on 15th  December,   2017,   when   it   passed   the   following   interim order:

“O R D E R Issue notice.
As   Dr.   Abhishek   Manu   Singhvi   and   Mr.   R.S.   Suri, learned   senior   counsel   along   with   Mr.   Prabhjit   Jauhar, learned counsel has entered appearance for the respondent No.2, no further notice need be issued.
Counter affidavit be filed within two weeks. Rejoinder affidavit, if any, be filed within a week therefrom.
Let the matter be listed on 24th January, 2018. As   an   interim   measure,   it   is   directed   that   the arrangements   made   by   the   High   Court   for   the   visitation rights   shall   remain   in   force.   The   petitioner­wife   shall   not create any kind of impediment in the meeting of the father with the child.
In the course of hearing, we have also been apprised by Dr. Singhvi that the Green Card issued in favour of the petitioner­wife is going to expire on 22nd December, 2017. Be that as it may, If, eventually, the petitioner loses in this proceeding and the respondent No.2 succeeds, the expiration of the Green Card cannot be a ground to deny the custody of the child to the father. Needless to say, if the petitioner wife intends to go to United States of America and gets the Green Card renewed, it is open for her to do so. We may also record that the husband has acceded to, as stated by the learned counsel for the respondent No.2, that he shall not implicate her in any criminal proceeding.” In continuation of the aforementioned interim arrangement, a further order was passed by this Court on 24th January, 2018, which reads thus:
“O R D E R Heard   Mr.   Kapil   Sibal,   learned   senior   counsel   along with   Ms.   Malavika   Rajkotia,   learned   counsel   for   the petitioner and Dr. A.M.Singhvi, learned senior counsel along with   Mr.   Prabhjit   Jauhar,   learned   counsel   for   the respondents.
Though,   we   are   not   inclined   to   interfere   with   the interim   arrangement   made   by   the   High   Court   yet,   regard being had to some grievances of both the parties, we intend to pass an order clarifying the position.
Having   heard   learned   counsel   for   the   parties,   it   is directed as follows:
(i) Whenever respondent No.2 is available in India, he shall   intimate   the   petitioner   by   E­mail   and   also forward a copy of the said E­mail to the counsel for the petitioner so that she can make the child available for meeting   with   the   father   at   Promenade   Mall,   Vasant Kunj between 5.30 P.M. to 7.30 P.M. on weekdays and 11.00 A.M. to 2.00 P.M. on holidays when the school is closed.

(ii)   When   the   father   will   be   meeting   the   child,   they shall meet without any supervision. 

(iii)   When   the   father   is   not   in   India,   there   can   be communication/interaction   through   Skype   at   about 7.30 P.M.(Indian Standard Time) or any other mode on line. 

(iv) The passport of the child, which is presently with the father, shall be handed over to the mother  for a period of one week so that she can take appropriate steps to complete certain formalities for admission of the   child   in   a   school.   This   direction   is   without prejudice   to   the   final   result   in   the   special   leave petition.   The   passport   shall   be   returned   by Ms.Malavika   Rajkotia,   learned   counsel   for   the petitioner   to   Mr.Prabhjit   Jauhar,   learned   counsel   for the respondents.

Let the matter be listed on 19.02.2018 at 2.00 P.M. for final disposal.” These are the relevant interim orders, which were to operate until the final disposal of the appeals. On 18th  May, 2018, a grievance was made before this Court about non­cooperation by the appellant, which has been recorded as under:

“O R D E R As mentioned in the first hour, the matter is taken up today.   Be   it   noted,   we   have   listed   the   matter   today   as   it relates to the conversation right of the father with the child.
In the course of hearing, Mr. Prabhjit Jauhar, learned counsel appearing for the respondent­father submitted that the   directions   issued   by   this   Court   on   earlier   occasion relating to Skype contact are not being complied with.
Ms. Malavika Rajkotia, learned counsel appearing for the   appellant   submitted   that   there   has   been   no   deviation and   in   any   case,   the   mother   does   not   intend   to   anyway affect, indict or intervene in the right to converse by Skype. Ms. Rajkotia has assured this Court that her client has not given   any   occasion   to   raise   any   grievance   and   if   any grievance is nurtured by the father, the same shall be duly addressed, so that the order of this Court is duly complied with.
We   are   sure,  the  parties  shall  behave   like   compliant litigants.” The   hearing  was   concluded and the interim  arrangement as directed by this Court was to be observed by the parties until the pronouncement of the final judgment. 
12. The   appellant,   being   the   mother   of   the   minor   child   M, has   assailed   the   decision   of   the   High   Court   for   having overlooked the rudimentary principles governing the issue of invoking   jurisdiction   to   issue   a   writ   of   habeas   corpus   in respect   of   a   minor   child   who   was   in   lawful   custody   of   her mother.   According   to   the   appellant,   the   High   Court   has completely glossed over or to put it differently, misconstrued and   misapplied   the   principles   of   paramount   interest   of   the minor girl child of tender age of about 4 years. Similarly, the High Court has glossed over the doctrine of choice and dignity of   the   mother   of   a   minor   girl   child   keeping   in   mind   the exposition in K.S. Puttaswamy & Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors.1  The High Court has also failed to take into account that the intimate contact of the minor child would be her mother who was her primary care giver and more so, when she was at the   relevant   time   in   the   company   of   her   mother.     The appellant, being the mother, had a fundamental right to look after   her  minor   daughter  which  cannot  be whittled down or trivialized on the considerations which found favour with the High Court. The welfare and paramount interest of the minor girl child  would   certainly  lean towards the mother, all other things being equal. The role of the mother of a minor girl child cannot   be   reduced   to   an   appendage   of   the   child   and   the mother cannot be forced to stay in an unfriendly environment 1 (2017) 10 SCC 1 where   she   had   been   victim   of   domestic   violence   inflicted   on her.  This  would  be  so when the mother was also a working woman   whose   career   would   be   at   stake   in   the   event   the directions given by the High Court were to be complied with in letter and spirit. The High Court ought to have adopted a child rights based approach but the reasons which weighed with the High   Court,   clearly   manifest   that   it   was   influenced   by   the values of pre­constitutional morality standard. The approach of   the   High   Court,   of   delineating   an   arrangement,   which   it noted as the lowest prejudice option to the mother,   has no place for deciding the issue of removing the custody of a minor girl child of tender age from her mother and giving it to her father for being taken away to her native country.   The High Court   has   misunderstood   and   misapplied   the   principle expounded   in  Nithya  Anand   Raghavan   Vs.   State   (NCT   of Delhi) & Anr.,2   and    Prateek Gupta Vs. Shilpi Gupta & Ors.3 The High Court has completely overlooked the autonomy of the appellant inasmuch as the directions given by the High 2 (2017) 8 SCC 454 3 (2018) 2 SCC 309 Court   would   virtually   subjugate   all   her   rights   and   would compel her to stay in an unfriendly environment at the cost of her career and dignity. The arrangement directed by the High Court   can,   by   no   standard,   be   said   to   be   a   just   and   fair muchless collaborative arrangement to be worked out between the parents, without compromising on the paramount interest and welfare of the minor girl child. The High Court committed a manifest error in answering the issue of best interest of the minor girl child, inter alia on the basis of the provisions of the Juvenile Justice Act and disregarding the crucial fact that the minor girl child was presently staying with her mother along with   her   extended   family,   which   she   would   be   completely deprived of if taken away to a place within the jurisdiction of the   US   Court  by   respondent  No.2 ­  her  father.   It  was  also contended that in the process of reasoning out the plea taken by the appellant regarding the circumstances in which she fled from USA with the minor girl child due to domestic violence inflicted   on   her,   the   said   issue   has   been   trivialized.   It   is contended   that   as   the   marriage   between   the   appellant   and respondent No.2 was solemnized in New Delhi as per Anand Karaj   ceremony   and   Hindu   Vedic   rites,   the   fact   that   the appellant went to the United States to stay with her husband, would make no difference to her status and nationality, much less   have   any   bearing  on   the  issue of    best  interest    of  the minor girl child. 

13.   On the other hand, the respondent No.2 would submit that  the High  Court analysed all the relevant aspects of the matter keeping in mind the legal principles expounded in the recent   decisions   of   this   Court   and   recorded   its   satisfaction about the best interest  of the minor girl child coupled with the necessity   of   the   minor   girl   child   to   be   produced   before   the Circuit   Court   of   Cook   County,   Illinois,   USA,   which   had intimate contact with the minor girl child,   inasmuch as the minor   girl   child   was   born   and   was   domiciled   within   the jurisdiction   of   that   Court   before   she   was   clandestinely removed by the appellant to India. It is contended that since both the father as well as the minor girl child are US citizens and the mother is a permanent resident of US and domiciled in   that   country,   only   the   Courts   of   that   country   will   have jurisdiction   to   decide   the   matrimonial   issues   between   the parties,   including   custody   of   the   minor   girl   child   and   her guardianship.  Further, at the tender age of about 3 years, the minor girl child had hardly spent any time in India so as to suggest that she has gained consciousness in India and thus it would be in the  best interest of the child to be taken away to the US. It is contended by respondent No.2 that the High Court has analysed all the relevant facts before recording the finding   that   the   welfare   and   best   interest   of   the   minor   girl child would be served by returning to United States. As that finding is based on  tangible material on record as adverted to by the High Court, this Court should be loath to overturn the same and, more so, when the High Court has issued directions to balance the equities and also facilitate return of the minor child   to   be   produced   before   the   Court   of   competent jurisdiction. The directions so issued are no different than the directions given by this Court in  Nithya Anand Raghavan’s case, (supra).   It is contended by respondent No.2 that this Court may primarily examine the directions issued by the High Court and if necessary, issue further directions to safeguard the interest of the appellant, but in no case should the plea taken by  the  appellant, that the minor girl child should not return   to   US,   be   accepted.   It   is   contended   that   the   sole consideration   in   a   proceeding   such   as   this,   must   be   to ascertain   the   welfare   of   the   minor   girl   child   and   not   to adjudicate upon the rights of the father or the mother. While doing so, the Court may take into account all such aspects to ascertain   as   to   whether   any   harm   would   be   caused   to   the minor child or for that matter, has been caused in the past during   her   stay   in   US.     From   the   order   passed   by   the   US Court, it is evident that the custody of the minor girl child with the appellant had become unlawful and for which reason, this Court in exercise  of  its jurisdiction for  issuance of a writ of habeas corpus, must direct the appellant to give the custody of the   minor   girl   child   to   her   father.   It   is   contended   that   the argument regarding health or personal matters raised by the appellant are only arguments of causing prejudice and should have   no   bearing   for   answering   the   matters   in   issue, particularly in the context of the equitable directions passed by   the   High   Court.    The Court must keep in  mind  that the minor girl child is presently staying in India without a valid Visa after her Visa obtained for travelling to India expired.  The respondent No.2 would submit that no interference with the directions issued by the High Court is warranted in the fact situation of the present case. 

14. We   have   heard   Ms.   Malavika   Rajkotia,   learned   counsel appearing for the appellant and Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent No.2. 

15. We   shall  first  advert to  the  analysis made by   the High Court   in   respect   of   the   contentious   issues.   That   can   be discerned   from   paragraph   102   onwards   of   the   impugned judgment.   The   High   Court   was   conscious   of   the   fact   that   it must first examine  the issue regarding the welfare and best interest   of the minor child. It noted that the minor girl child was about 3 years when the writ petition for habeas corpus was   preferred   on   1st  February,   2017.   It   then  noted   that   the respondent No.2 – father of the minor girl child had acquired citizenship   of   the   USA   in   2005   and   holds   an   American Passport.     He   is   living   in   the   USA   since   1994   and   is   thus domiciled in the USA. He had acquired a Bachelors’ degree in Economics and obtained MBA qualification from the University of Chicago.  He was an Education Software Entrepreneur. The appellant wife is the biological mother of the minor child M, who has acquired permanent resident status of the USA i.e. Green Card and had also applied for American citizenship on 2nd December, 2016. The respondent No.2 and appellant were classmates during their schooling and revived their contacts in 2000. Eventually, they decided to get married and thereafter reside in USA where the respondent No.2 had his work place and   home.     The   marriage   was   solemnized   in   New   Delhi   in India on 31st October, 2010 as per Anand Karaj ceremony, and Hindu   Vedic   rites   in   the   presence   of   the   elders   of   both   the families.   After   the   appellant   arrived   in   USA,   they   performed civil   marriage   before   the   competent   Court   in   USA   on   19 th March, 2011. 

16. The   High   Court  adverted  to  the  accomplishment  of  the appellant   in   her   education   and   occupation.   The   High   Court noted   that   the   couple   started   their   matrimonial   life   in   the United   States   and   lived   as   a   couple   in   that   country.   They made the United States their home and their entire married life, except the duration during which they were on short visits to India, had been spent in the USA.  They gave birth to a girl child   M   in   USA   on   15th  February,   2014   at   North   Western Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois, USA. The minor child M is   a   US   citizen   by   birth   and   grew   up   there   until   she   was clandestinely   removed   by   the   appellant   to   India   on   25 th December,   2016.   The   minor   child   had,   in   fact,   started attending pre­school in Chicago and had a full time schedule at school from August, 2016. Thus, the mental development of M while she was in USA till the end of 2016, had taken place to such an extent that she was very well aware and conscious of her surroundings. She was perceiving and absorbing from her   surroundings   and   communicated   not   only   with   her parents, but also with her other relatives, her peers at the pre­ school,   her   instructors,   teachers   and   other   care   givers.   The American way of life and systems were already in the process of being learnt and experienced by M when she came to India in   December,   2016.   The   environment   which   M   was experiencing during her growth was the natural environment of   Chicago,   USA.   Both   her   parents   were   looking   after   her proper   upbringing.   The   Court   also   noted   that   the   paternal grandparents   of   the   minor   child   M   were   visiting   and interacting with her. The Court then adverted to the decisions in  Surinder Kaur Sandhu Vs. Harbax Singh Sandhu and Anr.4, Aviral Mittal Vs. State5, Shilpa Aggarwal Vs. Aviral Mittal and Anr.6, Dr. V. Ravi Chandran Vs. Union of India & Ors.7, and Nithya Anand Raghavan (supra), to opine that the Court in the US seemed to be the most appropriate Court to  decide   the  issue  of custody of M, considering that it had 4  (1984) 3 SCC 698 5  (2009) 112 DRJ 635 6  (2010) 1 SCC 591 7   (2010) 1 SCC 174 intimate contact with the parties and the child. It went on to observe   that   it   was   neither   inclined     nor   in   a   position   to undertake a detailed enquiry into aspects of custody, visitation and   co­parenting   of   the   minor   child   in   the   facts   and circumstances of the case, considering all the events unfolded in, circumstances developed in and evidences were located in the   USA.   After   having   said   this,   it   examined   the   compelling reasons disclosed by the appellant to dissuade the Court from issuing directions for return of M to her native country and the environment where she was born and being brought up. That analysis has been done in paragraph 114 onwards. The High Court   considered   the   grievances   of   the   appellant   in paragraphs 114 to 117 in the following words: 

“114.   The   allegations   of   respondent   no.2   against   the petitioner   and   his   mother   are   that   the   petitioner’s   mother follows a strict eco­friendly lifestyle and imposes the same on the   couple,   which   even   caused   chronic   backache   to   the respondent   since   she   was   forced   to   sleep   on   a   hard   eco­ friendly mattress. She claim that all her day to day affairs were influenced by the lifestyle of her mother in law, such as not   using   plastic   products,   non   stick   cookware,   personal care   products   etc.   The   respondent   had   no   voice   in   the matter.   The   petitioner   took   minimal   interest   in   household affairs, while his mother interfered in the lives of the parties by tracking their schedules. The petitioner and his mother did not respect the respondents privacy and the plan of the parties   to   bear   a   child   were   disclosed   to   the   petitioner’s mother in advance. She even imposed lifestyle changes upon the respondent. The petitioner’s mother also did not permit the   respondent   to   maintain   a   secular   household.   She   was not permitted to celebrate both Sikh and Hindu festivals and the petitioner insisted that they celebrate only Sikh festivals. Respondent   no.2   states   that   she   was   diagnosed   with   a grave’s   disease   in   October   2014.   The   petitioner   and   his mother   insisted   that   the   respondent   undergoes   surgery rather than taking medication, since medication would have made it difficult for her to conceive in future. She claims that the petitioner even threatened her with divorce in case she prioritised   her   own   health   at   the   cost   of   expanding   their family.   The   respondent   makes   several   other   allegations against the petitioner and his mother complaining of cruelty and indifference on their part towards her. 
115. The above allegations per se do not suggest any grave undesirable conduct or deviant behavior on the part of the petitioner, or his mother qua the child M – even if they were to be assumed to be true for the time being. The allegations even remotely, not such as to suggest that the minor child M may   be   exposed   to   any   adversity,   harm,   undesirable influence, or danger if she were to be allowed to meet them or spend time with them in USA. There is nothing to suggest that the petitioner – father of M, or her grandmother would leave   a   bad   and   undesirable   influence   on   M.   These allegations   are   not   such   as   to   persuade   this   Court   not   to send  the  child  M  back  to her  country  of  origin  and  initial upbringing. On the contrary, the petitioner appears to be an educated   person   who   is   gainfully   managing   his   business, and   the   photographs   on   record   show   healthy   bonding between M and her father. He also appears to have actively participated in the upbringing of M – if the averments made by him in his petition are to be believed. In fact, respondent no.2   had   also   expressed   her   willingness   to   let   M   interact with the petitioner and to allow him visitation rights, which would not have been the case if she considered him to be a bad influence on, or a potential threat to her daughter. The fact that the petitioner’s mother is a pediatrician, in fact, is a reassuring fact that M would be taken good care of medically in her tender years. The photographs filed by the petitioner along with the petition show M to be having a healthy and normal   upbringing   while   she   was   in   USA.   She   is   seen enjoying   the   love,   care   and   company   of   her   parents   and others   –   including   children   of   her   age.   There   is   no  reason why   she   should   be   allowed   to   be   uprooted   from   the environment in which she was naturally growing up, and to be retained in an environment where she would not have the love,   care   and   attention   of   her   father   and   paternal grandparents,   apart   from   her   peers,   teachers,   school   and other care givers who were, till recently, with her. 
116.   From   the   allegations   made   by   respondent   No.2,   it appears   that   she   may   have   had   issues   of   living   with   and adjusting with the petitioner and his parents – particularly the   mother­in­law.   However,   there   is   absolutely   nothing placed on record to even remotely suggest that so far as the petitioner is concerned, his conduct qua M and his presence with M, or for that matter, even the grandparents, could be said   to   be   detrimental   to   or   harmful   for   M.   It   certainly cannot be said that if M were to be returned to her place of origin   where   she   spent   the   initial   three   years   of   her   life   – considering   that   those   three   years   constitute   more   than 3/4th of her entire existence on this planet till date, would be detrimental to her interest in any manner whatsoever. 
117.   The   parties  started   their   married  life  in  USA,  and  as clearly   appears   from   their   conduct,   their   mutual commitment   was   to   spend   their   married   life   and   to   raise their children in USA. There is absolutely nothing to suggest that the parties mutually ever agreed to or intended to shift from   their   place   of   residence   to   a   place   in   India,   though respondent no.2 may have unilaterally so desired. In such a situation,  in  our   view,  respondent  No.2  cannot  breach her maternal   commitment   without   any   valid   justification   and remain   in   return   to   India   with   M   –   who   is   an   American citizen and would, obviously, be attached to her father and grandparents;   her   home;   her   Nanny;   her   teachers   & instructors   and   her   peers   and   friends,   all   of   whom   are   in USA.”

17. After   having   said   this,   the   High   Court   considered   the argument of the appellant that she was the primary care giver qua M but disregarded the same by observing that that alone cannot be made the basis to reject the prayer for return of the minor girl child to her native country, and more so, when the minor girl child deserves love, affection and care of her father as well. The Court found that nothing prevents the appellant from returning to the USA if she so desires. Further, the fact that   the   minor   girl  child   would  make  new   friends   and  have new care givers and teachers in India at a new school, cannot be the basis to deny her the love and affection of her biological father   or   parenting   of   grandparents   which   was   equally important for the grooming and upbringing of the child.   The Court then went on to notice that the expression “best interest of child” is wide in its connotation and cannot be limited only to love and care of the primary care giver i.e. the mother. It then adverted to the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and   Protection  of   Children)  Act, 2015, while making  it clear that   it  was   conscious   of  the   fact  that   the  said  Act   may   not strictly apply to the case on hand for examining the issue of best   interest   of   the   child.   In   paragraphs   124   to   126   of   the impugned judgment, it went on to observe thus:    

“124. Thus, all decisions regarding the child should be based on primary consideration that they are in the best interest of the child and to help the child to develop to full potential. When involvement of one of the parents is not shown to be detrimental to the interest of the child, it goes without saying that to develop full potential of the child, it is essential that the child should receive the love, care and attention of both his/ her parents, and not just one of them, who may have decided on the basis of his/ her differences with the other parent,   to   re­locate   in   a   different   country.   Development   of full potential of the child requires participation of both the parents. The child, who does not receive the love, care and attention   of   both   the   parents,   is   bound   to   suffer   from psychological and emotional trauma, particularly if the child is small and of tender age. The law also recognizes the fact that   the   primary   responsibility   of   care,   nutrition   and protection of the child falls primarily on the biological family. The “biological family” certainly cannot mean only one of the two parents, even if that parent happens to be the primary care giver. 
125. The JJ Act encourages restoration of the child to be re­ united with his family at the earliest, and to be restored to the same socio­economic and cultural status that he was in, before   being   removed   from   that   environment,   unless   such restoration   or   repatriation   is   not   in   his   best   interest.   The present is not a case where respondent No.2 fled from USA or   decided   to   stay   back   in   India   on   account   of   any   such conduct of the petitioner which could be said to have been detrimental to her own interest, or the interest of the minor child   M.   The   decision   of   respondent   No.2   to   stay   back   in India   is   entirely   personal   to   her,   and   her   alone.   It   is   not based on consideration of the best welfare of the minor child M. In fact, the best interest of the child M has been sidelined by respondent no.2 while deciding to stay back in India with M. 
126.   Pertinently,   respondent   No.2   in   her   statement   in response to the missing person report made by the petitioner on   14.01.2017   vide   DD   No.20B   dated   14.01.2017   at   PS   – Vasant Kunj (South), New Delhi, inter alia, stated that ‘the parties came to New Delhi, India with their daughter M on 20.12.2016.   She   further   stated   that   during   this   time,   I realized that I do not want to continue with his suppressed marriage and file for divorce and custody petition against K G   in   the   Hon’ble   Court   Sh.   Arun   Kumar   Arya,   Principle Judge,   Family   Courts,   Patiala   House,   New   Delhi   via   HMA No.27/17……’.   Thus,   it   appears   from   the   statement   of respondent No.2 that the realization that she did not want to continue in her marriage dawned upon her only when she came to India, and it is not that when she left the shores of USA in December 2016, she left with a clear decision in her mind that she would not return to USA for any specific and justifiable reason.” 

18. Reference   was   then   made   to   the   provisions   of   the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly   of   the   United  Nations  dated 20 th  November,  1989, which   was   ratified   by   the   Government   of   India   on   11 th December,   1992,   and   the   resolution   by   the   Government   of India issued by the Ministry of Human Resource Development vide   Resolution   No.6­15/98   C.W.,   dated   9 th  February,   2004 framing   the   “National   Charter   for   Children,   2003”   and   the Court observed in paragraph 138  as follows:

“138. Thus, best welfare of the child, normally, would lie in living   with   both   his/   her   parents   in   a   happy,   loving   and caring   environment,   where   the   parents   contribute   to   the upbringing of the child in all spheres of life, and the child receives emotional, social, physical and material support ­ to name a few. In a vitiated marriage, unfortunately, there is bound  to   be   impairment   of   some   of   the   inputs  which   are, ideally, essential for the best interest of the child. Then the challenge posed before the Court would be to determine and arrive   at   an   arrangement,   which   offers   the   best   possible solution in the facts and circumstances of a given case, to achieve the best interest of the child.”

19. On a perusal of the impugned judgment, it is noticed that the   High   Court   has   taken   note   of   all   the   relevant   decisions including the latest three­Judge Bench decision of this Court in  Nithya Anand Raghavan’s case, (supra), which has had occasion to exhaustively analyse the earlier decisions on the subject   matter   under   consideration.   The   exposition   in   the earlier   decisions   has   been   again   restated   and   re­affirmed   in the subsequent decision of this Court in  Prateek Gupta Vs. Shilpi Gupta & Ors., (supra).  Let us, therefore, revisit these two   decisions.     In   paragraph   40   of   the  Nithya   Anand Raghavan’s case, (supra), this Court observed thus:

“40. The Court has noted that India is not yet a signatory to the   Hague   Convention   of   1980   on   “Civil   Aspects   of International   Child   Abduction”.  As   regards   the   non­ Convention   countries,   the   law  is   that  the   court   in   the country   to   which   the   child   has   been   removed   must consider   the   question   on   merits   bearing   the   welfare   of the   child   as   of   paramount   importance   and   reckon   the order  of the  foreign court as only a factor  to  be  taken into   consideration,   unless   the   court   thinks   it   fit   to exercise   summary   jurisdiction   in   the   interests   of   the child and its prompt return is for its welfare.  In exercise of summary jurisdiction, the court must be satisfied and of the  opinion  that   the  proceeding   instituted  before  it  was in close   proximity   and   filed   promptly   after   the   child   was removed   from   his/her   native   state   and   brought   within   its territorial   jurisdiction,   the   child   has   not   gained   roots   here and further that it will be in the child’s welfare to return to his native state because of the difference in language spoken or   social  customs  and  contacts  to which  he/she  has been accustomed or such other tangible reasons. In such a case the   court   need   not   resort   to   an   elaborate   inquiry   into   the merits of the paramount welfare of the child but leave that inquiry to the foreign court by directing return of the child. Be   it   noted   that   in   exceptional   cases   the   court   can   still refuse   to   issue   direction   to   return   the   child   to   the   native state and more particularly in spite of a pre­existing order of the   foreign   court   in   that   behalf,   if   it   is   satisfied   that   the child’s return may expose him to a grave risk of harm. This means that the courts in India, within whose jurisdiction the minor   has   been   brought   must   “ordinarily”   consider   the question on merits, bearing in mind the welfare of the child as   of   paramount   importance   whilst   reckoning   the   pre­ existing order of the foreign court if any as only one of the factors and not get fixated therewith. In either situation—be it a summary inquiry or an elaborate inquiry—the welfare of the   child   is   of   paramount   consideration.  Thus,   while examining   the   issue   the   courts   in   India   are   free   to decline the relief of return of the child brought within its jurisdiction, if it is satisfied that the child is now settled in its new environment or if it would expose the child to physical   or   psychological   harm   or   otherwise   place   the child   in   an   intolerable   position   or   if   the   child   is   quite mature   and   objects   to   its   return.  We   are   in   respectful agreement with the aforementioned exposition.” (emphasis supplied) Again in paragraph 42, the Court observed thus:
“42. The consistent view of this Court is that if the child has been brought within India, the courts in India may conduct:
(a)   summary   inquiry;   or   (b)   an   elaborate   inquiry   on   the question of custody. In the case of a summary inquiry, the court may deem it fit to order return of the child to the country   from   where   he/she   was   removed   unless   such return   is   shown   to   be   harmful   to   the   child.  In   other words, even in the matter of a summary inquiry, it is open to the court  to decline the relief of return of the child to the country   from   where   he/she   was   removed   irrespective   of   a pre­existing order of return of the child by a foreign court. In an   elaborate   inquiry,   the   court   is   obliged   to   examine   the merits as to where the paramount interests and welfare of the child lay and reckon the fact of a pre­existing order of the foreign court for return of the child as only one of the circumstances.  In either case, the crucial question to be considered   by   the   court   (in   the   country   to   which   the child is removed) is to answer the issue according to the child’s welfare. That has to be done bearing in mind the totality   of   facts   and   circumstances   of   each   case independently.   Even   on   close   scrutiny   of   the   several decisions pressed before us,  we do not find any contra view   in   this   behalf.  To   put   it   differently,   the   principle   of comity of courts cannot be given primacy or more weightage for deciding the matter of custody or for return of the child to the native State.” (emphasis supplied) It will be apposite to also advert to paragraphs 46 & 47 of the reported decision, which read thus:
“46.  The   High   Court   while   dealing   with   the   petition   for issuance   of   a   writ   of   habeas   corpus   concerning   a   minor child,   in   a   given   case,   may   direct   return   of   the   child   or decline to change the custody of the child keeping in mind all   the   attending   facts   and   circumstances   including   the settled legal position referred to above. Once again, we may hasten   to   add   that   the   decision   of   the   court,   in   each case,   must   depend   on   the   totality   of   the   facts   and circumstances   of   the   case   brought   before   it   whilst considering   the   welfare   of   the   child   which   is   of paramount consideration. The order of the foreign court must   yield   to   the   welfare   of   the   child.   Further,   the remedy of writ of habeas corpus cannot be used for mere enforcement of the directions given by the foreign court against a person within its jurisdiction and convert that jurisdiction into that of an executing court. Indubitably, the writ petitioner can take recourse to such other remedy as may   be   permissible   in   law   for   enforcement   of   the   order passed   by   the   foreign   court   or   to   resort   to   any   other proceedings as may be permissible in law before the Indian Court for the custody of the child, if so advised.
47.  In   a   habeas   corpus   petition   as   aforesaid,   the   High Court must examine at the threshold whether the minor is   in   lawful   or   unlawful   custody   of   another   person (private   respondent   named   in   the   writ   petition).   For considering that issue, in a case such as the present one, it   is   enough   to   note   that   the   private   respondent   was none other than the natural guardian of the minor being her  biological  mother.  Once  that  fact  is  ascertained,  it can   be   presumed   that   the   custody   of   the   minor   with his/her   mother   is   lawful.   In   such   a   case,   only   in exceptionable   situation,   the   custody   of   the   minor   (girl child) may be ordered to be taken away from her mother for   being   given   to   any   other   person   including   the husband   (father   of   the   child),   in   exercise   of   writ jurisdiction.  Instead,   the   other   parent   can   be   asked   to resort to a substantive prescribed remedy for getting custody of the child.” (emphasis supplied) Again in paragraph 50, the Court expounded as under: 
“50.  The High Court in such a situation may then examine whether   the   return   of   the   minor   to   his/her   native   state would be in the interests of the minor or would be harmful. While doing so, the High Court would be well within its jurisdiction if satisfied, that having regard to the totality of   the   facts   and   circumstances,   it   would   be   in   the interests and welfare of the minor child to decline return of the child to the country from where he/she had been removed;   then   such   an   order   must   be   passed   without being fixated with the factum of an order of the foreign court directing return of the child within the stipulated time, since the order of the foreign court must yield to the welfare of the child. For answering this issue, there can   be   no   straitjacket   formulae   or   mathematical exactitude.  Nor   can   the   fact   that   the   other   parent   had already   approached   the   foreign   court   or   was   successful   in getting an order from the foreign court for production of the child,   be   a   decisive   factor.   Similarly,   the   parent   having custody   of   the   minor   has   not   resorted   to   any   substantive proceeding for custody of the child, cannot whittle down the overarching principle of the best interests and welfare of the child to  be  considered by  the Court.  That ought  to be the paramount consideration.” (emphasis supplied) In paragraphs 67 and 69, the Court propounded thus: 
“67.  The facts in all the four cases primarily relied upon by Respondent   2,   in   our   opinion,   necessitated   the   Court   to issue direction to return the child to the native state. That does not mean that in deserving cases the courts in India are denuded from declining the relief to return the child to the native   state   merely   because   of   a   pre­existing   order   of   the foreign  court   of  competent  jurisdiction.  That,  however,  will have   to   be   considered   on   case   to   case   basis   —   be   it   in   a summary inquiry or an elaborate inquiry. We do not wish to dilate   on   other   reported   judgments,   as   it   would   result   in repetition of similar position and only burden this judgment.
xxx xxx xxx
69.  ……………  The   summary   jurisdiction   to   return   the child   be   exercised   in   cases   where   the   child   had   been removed   from   its   native   land   and   removed   to   another country   where,   may   be,   his   native   language   is   not spoken,   or   the   child   gets   divorced   from   the   social customs and contacts to which he has been accustomed, or if its education in his native land is interrupted and the   child   is   being   subjected   to   a   foreign   system   of education,   for   these   are   all   acts   which   could psychologically   disturb   the   child.  Again   the   summary jurisdiction be exercised only if the court to which the child has   been   removed   is   moved   promptly   and   quickly.   The overriding consideration must be the interests and welfare of the child.” (emphasis supplied)

20. At   this   stage,   we   deem   it   apposite   to   reproduce paragraphs 70 and 71 of the reported judgment, which may have some bearing on the final order to be passed in this case. The same read thus:

“70.  Needless to observe that after the minor child (Nethra) attains the age of majority, she would be free to exercise her choice to go to the UK and stay with her father. But until she attains   majority,   she   should   remain   in   the   custody   of   her mother unless the court of competent jurisdiction trying the issue of custody of the child orders to the contrary. However, the father must be given visitation rights, whenever he visits India. He can do so by giving notice of at least two weeks in advance  intimating   in writing   to the  appellant  and  if  such request is received, the appellant must positively respond in writing to grant visitation rights to Respondent 2 Mr Anand Raghavan (father) for two hours per day twice a week at the mentioned   venue   in   Delhi   or   as   may   be   agreed   by   the appellant,   where   the   appellant   or   her   representatives   are necessarily present at or near the venue. Respondent 2 shall not be entitled to, nor make any attempt to take the child (Nethra) out from the said venue. The appellant shall take all such steps to comply with the visitation rights of Respondent 2, in its letter and spirit. Besides, the appellant will permit Respondent 2 Mr Anand Raghavan to interact with Nethra on   telephone/mobile   or   video   conferencing,   on   school holidays between 5 p.m. to 7.30 p.m. IST.
71. As mentioned earlier, the appellant cannot disregard the proceedings   instituted   before   the   UK   Court.   She   must participate in those proceedings by engaging solicitors of her choice to espouse her cause before the High Court of Justice.

For that, Respondent 2 Anand Raghavan will bear the costs of litigation and expenses to be incurred by the appellant. If the appellant is required to appear in the said proceeding in person   and   for   which   she   is   required   to   visit   the   UK, Respondent   2   Anand   Raghavan   will   bear   the   air   fares   or purchase the tickets for the travel of appellant and Nethra to the   UK   and   including   for   their   return   journey   to   India   as may be required. In addition, Respondent 2 Anand Raghavan will make all arrangements for  the comfortable stay  of the appellant   and   her   companions   at   an   independent   place   of her choice at reasonable costs. In the event, the appellant is required to appear in the proceedings before the High Court of   Justice   in   the   UK,   Respondent   2   shall   not   initiate   any coercive   process   against   her   which   may   result   in   penal consequences for the appellant and if any such proceeding is already   pending,   he   must   take   steps   to   first   withdraw   the same   and/or   undertake   before   the   court   concerned   not   to pursue   it   any   further.   That   will   be   condition   precedent   to pave   way   for   the   appellant   to   appear   before   the   court concerned in the UK.” 

21. In the subsequent judgment of two Judges of this Court in  Prateek   Gupta  (supra),   after   analysing   all   the   earlier decisions, in paragraphs 49 to 51 the Court noted thus:

“49.  The   gravamen   of   the   judicial   enunciation   on   the issue of repatriation of a child removed from its native country   is   clearly   founded   on   the   predominant imperative   of   its   overall   well­being,   the   principle   of comity of courts, and the doctrines of “intimate contact and   closest   concern”   notwithstanding.  Though   the principle   of   comity   of   courts   and   the   aforementioned doctrines qua a foreign court from the territory of which a child is removed are factors which deserve notice in deciding the issue of  custody  and repatriation of  the  child, it  is  no longer res integra that the ever­overriding determinant would be the welfare and interest of the child. In other words, the invocation of these principles/doctrines has to be judged on the touchstone of myriad attendant facts and circumstances of each case, the ultimate live concern being the welfare of the   child,   other   factors   being   acknowledgeably   subservient thereto.  Though   in   the   process   of   adjudication   of   the issue   of   repatriation,   a   court   can   elect   to   adopt   a summary enquiry and order immediate restoration of the child   to   its   native   country,   if   the   applicant/parent   is prompt   and   alert   in   his/her   initiative   and   the   existing circumstances ex facie justify such course again in the overwhelming exigency of the welfare of the child, such a   course   could   be   approvable   in   law,   if   an   effortless discernment  of   the   relevant  factors  testify  irreversible, adverse  and prejudicial impact on its physical, mental, psychological, social, cultural existence, thus exposing it to   visible,   continuing   and   irreparable   detrimental   and nihilistic   attenuations.  On   the   other   hand,   if   the applicant/parent   is   slack  and   there   is  a   considerable   time lag between the removal of the child from the native country and   the   steps   taken   for   its   repatriation   thereto,   the   court would prefer an elaborate enquiry into all relevant aspects bearing on the child, as meanwhile with the passage of time, it   expectedly   had   grown   roots   in   the   country   and   its characteristic   milieu,   thus   casting   its   influence   on   the process of its grooming in its fold.
50.  The   doctrines   of   ‘intimate   contact’   and   ‘closest concern’ are of persuasive relevance, only when the child is uprooted from its native country and taken to a place to encounter alien environment, language, custom, etc. with the portent of mutilative bearing on the process of its overall growth and grooming.
51.  It   has   been   consistently   held   that   there   is   no   forum convenience   in   wardship   jurisdiction   and   the   peremptory mandate   that   underlines   the   adjudicative   mission   is   the obligation to  secure  the  unreserved  welfare  of the child as the paramount consideration.” (emphasis supplied) Again, in paragraph 53 of the judgment, the Court observed thus:
“53.  ....  The   issue   with   regard   to   the   repatriation   of   a child,   as   the   precedential   explications   would authenticate has to be addressed not on a consideration of   legal   rights   of   the   parties   but   on   the   sole   and preponderant   criterion   of   the   welfare   of   the   minor.   As aforementioned,   immediate   restoration   of   the   child   is called   for  only   on   an  unmistakable   discernment  of   the possibility of immediate and irremediable harm to it and not   otherwise.   As   it   is,   a   child   of   tender   years,   with malleable   and   impressionable   mind   and   delicate   and vulnerable   physique   would   suffer   serious   set­back   if subjected  to  frequent  and  unnecessary  translocation  in its formative years. It is thus imperative that unless, the continuance of the child in the country to which it has been   removed,   is   unquestionably   harmful,   when   judged on   the   touchstone   of   overall   perspectives,   perceptions and   practicabilities,   it   ought   not   to   be   dislodged   and extricated from the environment and setting to which it had got adjusted for its well­being.” (emphasis supplied)

22. After these decisions, it is not open to contend that the custody of the female minor child with her biological mother would be unlawful, for there is presumption to the contrary. In such   a   case,   the   High   Court   whilst   exercising   jurisdiction under Article 226 for issuance of a writ of habeas corpus need not   make   any   further   enquiry   but   if   it   is   called   upon   to consider the prayer for return of the minor female child to the native   country,   it   has   the   option   to   resort   to   a   summary inquiry  or  an elaborate inquiry, as may be necessary  in the fact situation of the given case.  In the present case, the High Court noted that it was not inclined to undertake a detailed inquiry.   The   question   is,  having   said  that   whether   the   High Court   took   into   account   irrelevant   matters   for   recording   its conclusion that the minor female child, who was in custody of her   biological   mother,   should   be   returned   to   her   native country.   As   observed   in  Nithya   Anand   Raghavan’s   case (supra), the Court must take into account the totality of the facts  and  circumstances whilst ensuring  the best interest of the minor child. In  Prateek Gupta’s case  (supra), the Court noted that the adjudicative mission is the obligation to secure the   unreserved   welfare   of   the   child   as   the   paramount consideration.   Further,   the   doctrine   of   “intimate   and   closest concern” are of persuasive relevance, only when the child is uprooted   from   its   native   country   and   taken   to   a   place   to encounter alien environment, language, custom etc. with the portent   of   mutilative     bearing   on   the   process   of   its   overall growth   and   grooming.   The   High   Court   in   the   present   case focused primarily on the grievances of the appellant and while rejecting   those   grievances,   went   on   to   grant   relief   to respondent No.2 by directing return of the minor girl child to her   native   country.  On   the   totality   of   the   facts   and circumstances   of   the   present   case,   in   our   opinion,   there   is nothing  to indicate  that the native language (English) is not spoken or the child has been divorced from the social customs to which she has been accustomed. Similarly, the minor child had   just   entered   pre­school   in   the   USA   before   she   came   to New Delhi along with her mother. In that sense, there was no disruption   of   her   education   or   being   subjected   to   a   foreign system of education likely to psychologically disturb her. On the other hand, the minor child M is under the due care of her mother and maternal grand­parents and other relatives since her arrival in New Delhi. If she returns to US as per the relief claimed   by   the   respondent   No.2,   she   would   inevitably   be under the care of a Nanny as the respondent No.2 will be away during the day time for work and no one else from the family would be there at home to look after her. Placing her under a trained Nanny may not be harmful as such but it is certainly avoidable.   For,   there   is   likelihood   of   the   minor   child   being psychologically   disturbed   after   her   separation   from   her mother, who is the primary care giver to her. In other words, there   is   no   compelling   reason   to   direct   return   of   the   minor child M to the US as prayed by the respondent No.2 nor is her stay   in   the   company   of   her   mother,   along   with   maternal grand­parents and extended family   at New Delhi, prejudicial to her in any manner, warranting her return to the US.  

23. As expounded in the recent decisions of this Court, the issue   ought   not   to   be   decided   on   the   basis   of   rights   of   the parties   claiming   custody   of   the   minor   child   but   the   focus should   constantly   remain   on   whether   the   factum   of   best interest  of the minor child is to return to the native country or otherwise.   The   fact   that   the   minor   child   will   have   better prospects upon return to his/her   native country, may be a relevant   aspect   in   a     substantive   proceedings   for   grant   of custody   of   the   minor   child   but   not   decisive   to   examine   the threshold issues in a habeas corpus petition.  For the purpose of   habeas   corpus   petition,   the   Court   ought   to   focus   on   the obtaining   circumstances   of   the   minor   child   having   been removed   from   the   native   country   and   taken   to   a   place   to encounter alien environment, language, custom etc. interfering with   his/her   overall   growth   and   grooming   and   whether continuance   there   will   be   harmful.     This   has   been   the consistent view of this Court as restated in the recent three­ Judge   Bench   decision   in  Nithya  Anand   Raghavan  (supra), and the two­Judge Bench decision in Prateek Gupta (supra). It   is   unnecessary   to   multiply   other   decisions   on   the   same aspect. 

24. In the present case, the minor child M is a US citizen by birth. She has grown up in her native country for over three years before she was brought to New Delhi by her biological mother (appellant) in December 2016. She had joined a pre­ school in the USA. She had healthy bonding with her father (respondent   No.2).   Her   paternal   grand­parents   used   to   visit her in the USA at some intervals. She was under the care of a Nanny   during   the   day   time,   as   her   parents   were   working. Indeed,   the   work   place   of   her   father   is   near   the   home.   The biological father  (respondent No.2) of the minor  child M has acquired US citizenship. Both father and mother of the minor child M were of Indian origin but domiciled in the USA after marriage.  The  mother  (appellant)  is a permanent  resident of the   USA­Green   Card   holder   and   has   also   applied   for   US citizenship. In her affidavit filed before the Delhi High Court dated 30th  November, 2017, she admits that her legal status was complicated as she has ceased to be an Indian citizen and her status of citizenship of the USA is in limbo. 

25. Be that as it may, the father filed a writ petition before the Delhi High Court for issuance of a writ of Habeas Corpus for   production   of   the   minor   child   and   for   directions   for   her return to USA without any loss of time. Given the fact that the parties performed a civil marriage on 19 th March, 2011 in the USA   and   cohabited   in   the   native   country   and   gave   birth   to minor child M who grew up in that environment for at least three years, coupled with the fact that the father and minor child M are US citizens and mother is a permanent resident of USA, the closest contact and jurisdiction is possibly that of the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, USA. However, we may not be understood to have expressed any final opinion in this regard. At the same time, it is indisputable that the appellant and respondent No.2   first got married on 31 st  October, 2010 as per Sikh rites, i.e. Anand Karaj ceremony, and Hindu Vedic rites and that marriage was solemnised in New Delhi at which point of time the appellant was admittedly a citizen of India. Presently,   she   is   only   a   Green   Card   holder   (permanent resident)   of   the   US.   It   is,   therefore,   debatable   whether   the Family Court at New Delhi, where the appellant has already filed a petition for dissolution of marriage, has jurisdiction in that behalf including to decide on the question of custody and guardianship in respect of the minor child M. For that reason, it  may  be  appropriate that the said proceedings are decided with utmost promptitude in the first place before the appellant is called upon to appear before the US Court and including to produce the minor child M before that Court. 

26. It is not disputed that the appellant and minor child are presently in New Delhi and the appellant has no intention to return to her matrimonial home in the U.S.A. The appellant has apprehensions and serious reservations on account of her past   experience   in   respect   of   which   we   do   not   think   it necessary to dilate in this proceedings. That is a matter to be considered by the Court of Competent Jurisdiction called upon to decide the issue of dissolution of marriage and/or grant of custody of the minor child, as the case may be. For the time being,   we   may   observe   that   the   parties   must   eschew   from pursuing parallel proceedings in two different countries.  For, the first marriage between the parties was performed in New Delhi as per Anand Karaj Ceremony and Hindu Vedic rites on 31st October, 2010 and the petition for dissolution of marriage has   been   filed   in   New   Delhi.   Whereas,   the   civil   marriage ceremony   on   19th  March,   2011   at   Circuit   Court   of   Cook County,   Illinois,   USA,   was   performed   to   complete   the formalities for facilitating the entry of the appellant into the US and to obtain US Permanent Resident status.  It is appropriate that the proceedings pending in the Family Court at New Delhi are   decided   in   the   first   place   including   on   the   question   of jurisdiction  of  that  Court. Depending  on the outcome of the said proceedings, the parties will be free to pursue such other remedies   as   may   be   permissible   in   law   before   the   Court   of Competent Jurisdiction. 

27. As   aforesaid,   it   is   true   that   both   respondent   No.2   and also the minor child M are US citizens. The minor girl child has a US Passport and has travelled to India on a tenure Visa which has expired. That does not mean that she is in unlawful custody   of   her   biological   mother.     Her   custody   with   the appellant   would   nevertheless   be   lawful.   The   appellant   has already instituted divorce proceedings in the Family Court at Patiala House, New Delhi. The respondent No.2 has also filed proceedings   before   the   Court   in   the   US   for   custody   of   the minor   girl   child,   directing   her   return   to   her   natural environment in the US. In such a situation, the arrangement directed   by   this   Court   in   the   case   of  Nithya   Anand Raghavan (supra), as exposited in paragraphs 70­71, may be of some help to pass an appropriate order in the peculiar facts of this case, instead of directing the biological mother to return to   the   US   along   with   the   minor   girl   child,   so   as   to   appear before the competent court in the US.  In that, the custody of the minor girl child M would remain with the appellant until she   attains   the   age   of   majority   or   the   Court   of   competent jurisdiction,   trying   the   issue   of   custody   of   the   minor   child, orders to the contrary, with visitation and access rights to the biological   father   whenever   he   would   visit   India   and   in particular   as   delineated   in   the   interim   order   passed   by   us reproduced in paragraph 11 (eleven) above.  

28. A  fortiori, dependant on the outcome of the proceedings, before the Family Court at New Delhi, the appellant may then be legally obliged to participate in the proceedings before the US   Court   and   must   take   all   measures   to   effectively   defend herself   in   the   said   proceedings  by   engaging   solicitors   of   her choice   in   the   USA   to   espouse   her   cause   before   the   Circuit Court   of   Cook   County,   Illinois,   USA.   In   that   event,   the respondent No.2 shall bear the cost of litigation and expenses to   be   incurred   by   the   appellant   to   pursue   the   proceedings before   the   Courts   in   the   native   country.   In   addition,   the respondent No.2 will bear the air fares or purchase the tickets for the travel of the appellant and the minor child M to the USA and including their return journey for India, as may be required.   The   respondent   No.2   shall   also   make   all   suitable arrangements for the comfortable stay of the appellant and her companions   at   an   independent   place   of   her   choice,   at   a reasonable   cost.   Further,   the   respondent   No.2   shall   not initiate any coercive/penal action against the appellant and if any   such   proceeding   initiated   by   him   in   that   regard   is pending, the same shall be withdrawn and not pursued before the   concerned   Court  any  further. That   will  be  the   condition precedent   to   facilitate   the   appellant   to   appear   before   the Courts in the USA to effectively defend herself on all matters relating to the matrimonial dispute and including custody and guardianship of the minor child. 

       

29. The   appellant   and   respondent   No.2   must   ensure   early disposal of the proceedings for grant of custody of the minor girl child to the appellant, instituted and pending before the Family   Court   at   Patiala   House,   New   Delhi.   All   contentions available to the parties in that regard will have to be answered by the Family Court on its own merits and in accordance with law. 

30. We,   accordingly, set aside the  impugned  judgment  and orders of the High Court and dispose of the writ petition in the aforementioned terms. The appeals are allowed with no order as to costs. 

.………………………….CJI.

(Dipak Misra) …………………………..….J.           (A.M. Khanwilkar) …………………………..….J.          (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud) New Delhi;

July 20, 2018. 